the investments that went into what we
call today artificial intelligence
including you know LLM models, language
models, uh speech recognition dates you
know decades and like so many other
areas that was led by government. So if
you look at even DARPA which as you know
was the lead um investor in the internet
um it came from problems mainly in the
military-industrial complex that then
required uh ultimately what we're
calling artificial intelligence today
but again in the entrepreneurial state I
talked about how everything in our
smartphones that make them smart and not
stupid internet GPS touchscreen Siri and
so on were government finance what's
very scary today what's what makes today
different with AI is that that's not
really necessar necessarily going to be
true much longer. Why? Because these
massive economic rents, and I call them
rents, not profits. So, excess profits
in excess of what these companies
actually did because we privatized all
the rewards from this massive social
[laughter] and collectively created
value in this area. Um, they have so
much money, right? Trillions, not
billions, trillions. The salaries they
are paying to the top researchers in
universities, both public and private
universities. um and to people who used
to work in the NASA, the DARPA, the
Kofos in Chile, they are going now to
work in these companies. And that
hemorrhaging of talent of top research
expertise, I don't think people are
talking about this enough. It it
literally is the biggest change.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway. Uh, we're still
here in Madrid. Tracy, how are you? You
having a good time?
>> I am. I've eaten a lot of ham and
cheese. Me, too.
>> That's pretty much all I can say.
>> Yeah, I'm gonna turn into a hamone by
the time I leave. I'm certain of that.
Um, yeah. So, we are at the uh the
Bloomberg City Lab conference. You know,
it's funny like the mayoral level of
politics is not something we spend a ton
of time typically on, but I would say
like it definitely, you know, when I
think about it, when I'm like here and
like listening to a lot of the
conversations, it's just so obviously
like connected to a lot of the themes we
talk about because so much of our
discussions have to do with something
related to, you know, innovation or
technology or imple implementation of
policy and how it spans both the public
and private sectors.
>> Yeah. I mean, also when I think about a
lot of OddLots's topics like AI or
housing affordability or inequality,
like cities, I think City Lab actually
used this phrase at one point, but
cities are really at the front line of
all of those challenges, right? And
trying to implement policy in that local
level in a way that's like very easy to
see and observe and also to judge.
>> Totally. Yeah. No, it it's exactly
right. And I think maybe there's
something like you know I don't it feels
like to some extent the mayoral level of
any governance is sort of maybe the
least ideological and the most like you
know we talked to the Baltimore mayor
for example and so much of his theme was
just like talking to other mayors like
what's working in your town what's
working in your city and what's not
working and so forth. They all have such
similar challenges. So many things have
been like repeated, you know, one time
after another that like they all can
sort of speak the same language and all
have the same issues.
>> Yeah. It's funny you kind of get that
local idea swapping at a mayoral level
that I cannot imagine necessarily
happening in national politics. Like can
you imagine Trump and Xiinping getting
together and be like, "Oh, we
implemented this really cool like
national transportation program. Have
you tried it?"
>> Yeah. You don't know when you hear like
these stories, right, of a governor, a
governor sometimes or a mayor will go to
like another country like, "Oh, we can
like learn from what the city did on
transit or whatever." But no, you don't
really hear that the same way um at the
at the real national level, which is
where a lot of our discussions tend to
sit.
>> Absolutely.
>> Anyway, I'm really excited about today's
episode. We're going to be speaking with
a guest who I would say like since we've
been doing Odd Lodge is actually one of
the more frequently requested long
requested
>> and so it's sort of a failure on our
part that like we just like never made
it happen before. Um but yeah, someone
who like really like whose whole career
is like dedicated to a lot of odd lots
themes.
>> Well, we waited until we could do it at
Madrid.
>> I didn't want to just like do it at any
other random venue. Yes, it was all very
strategically designed. So, we really do
have the perfect guest, someone that a
lot of guests have wanted to listen to,
hear from for a long time. We're going
to be speaking with Mariana Maticado,
professor at University College London,
founder of the Institute for Public,
author of several books, sort of
touching on these themes of technology,
public sector, private sector, the roots
of innovation, how these things actually
get deployed. So, Professor Maticado,
thank you so much for uh coming on
OddLots. Thrilled to finally have you
on. Finally,
>> finally [laughter]
[clears throat] our completely our fault
for not having made it happen sooner.
But um what do you just start like what
are you doing here? What uh what brings
you to this particular conference? What
uh right
>> what what attracts you here?
>> Well, first of all, I'm here also
because the the government of Spain is
uh really kind of leading the way in
many areas that I'm very interested in,
especially the kind of new economic
thinking that needs to underpin how we
rethink government. And so I was meeting
with both the prime minister and the um
minister for the economy, Carlos
Quuerto, who I'm on a panel on today
with um about a council that we've just
set up. It's called the global council
for a common good economy. Um anyway,
and besides that, I'm also here to speak
at the Bloomberg um City Labs event
about this new public sector capability
index that we've been developing with
them as a partner, which is really
about, you know, reinvesting inside the
civil service so that they can really
tackle those wicked complex problems
instead of, you know, hiring Deote
during COVID and giving them 1.5 million
a day to do test and trace which they
fail at in the UK.
>> I definitely want to get you to go off
on consultants. [laughter]
Um, but before we do, like when you meet
with someone like the prime minister of
Spain, what is it that they want to know
from you? Like what information or
expertise are they seeking?
>> Right. Well, I'm actually quite lucky
that my books actually get read by the
prime minister. So, usually what happens
is that they've um especially the
entrepreneurial state which I, you know,
wrote in 2013 that had quite a bit a bit
of an effect here. They even wrote a
report called uh prenador esp um and
they really want to ask me you know what
does that mean? What does it mean for
actually even being able to fail for
example right so venture capitalists are
always was bragging about all the
failures that they had in order to get a
success you know whereas as soon as a
civil servant or a minister fails or a
prime minister fails front page of the
papers so they're very interested in the
kind of narrative change but also well
the cultural change but especially the
theoretical underpinning within say a
finance ministry or an economics
ministry that needs to then accompany
rethinking government because otherwise
if you continue to have the old economic
models where we judge things by
costbenefit analysis, net present value,
all these really static metrics. We
would have never even bothered going to
the moon. Okay. First of all, in the
1960s had we thought of it as a
costbenefit uh calculation. And so what
should replace that? Right. So you
mentioned the entrepreneurial state
being published in 2013 and I feel like
I need to emphasize this because like
there has been this mind shift since the
2020 pandemic on industrial policy and
we kind of take it almost as a given
especially on this show that there is a
role for governments to play when it
comes to innovation and
entrepreneurialism but you were there
very early. Did you feel vindicated by
the 2020 shift? Um well I think there's
a bit of a misunderstanding that just
because government's spending a lot of
money investing a lot of money whether
it's the IRA or the nextg EU two
trillion recovery uh plan in Europe that
that means that industrial strategy is
back or that you know government is
being really strategic. It depends and I
mean that's the whole point right you
know how are we actually framing it is
it just a lot of tax incentives are we
focused too much on sectors to what
degree uh is industrial strategy
actually helping to create a more
inclusive sustainable innovationdriven
you know economy or is it just another
wave of handouts and subsidies to
particular sectors and then we end up
socializing risks and privatizing
rewards and also I mean I used to joke
that um the US government has always had
an industrial strategy but you know
pretend tended not to. And they've
always, you know, talked the Jefferson
talked, but acted the Hamilton talk or
the Hamiltonian kind of, uh, uh, more,
you know, um, proactive government
strategy. But by pretending that wasn't
there, they kept a lot of things under
the radar.
>> And the joke bit is just that finally
people understood what the hell it was
talking about because of the because of
the musical before the musical came out,
Hamilton. Anyway, so I think that's
really important to recognize that
industrial strategy has always been
there except that in certain phases
including now in some countries it's not
really strategy in terms of being driven
by public purpose which as you said is
the title in this institute for
innovation and public purpose I direct
it's been just kind of vertical
strategies focus on sectors technologies
types of firms right the whole focus on
small medium enterprises so what I've
been trying to do is to say stop
focusing on sectors technologies and
firms terms focus on big problems,
right? As bold as going to the moon and
back at a short amount of time.
>> This is the mission idea.
>> The missions that then require sectoral
support, but you're not getting support
because you are particular sector.
You're getting support if you're
willing. So, moving away from picking
winners to picking the willing if you're
willing to work with government around
these very difficult challenges which
could be as I don't want to say simple
but as um concrete as making sure that
every child in a country has healthy,
tasty, sustainable school lunch, right?
not just school lunch. That was the
Reagan thing where he said ketchup is a
vegetable so we can reduce the cost. We
all had t-shirts of Reagan and ketchup,
which was the vegetable is what the
t-shirt said. Um so having moonshots
even on something as simple as a
cafeteria that then requires innovation
across many different areas. It requires
government to wake up and not just have
that be done for example from the
department of education. you know,
Department of Agriculture, Health,
Education, Finance would work together
on a moonshot of healthy, tasty,
sustainable school lunch. So that
interministerial coordination, which we
saw during CO, right? So we had the war
room, the situation room, you know, the
military, education, health and so on
together because we had these really
difficult challenges. But as soon as CO
stops, we go back to very siloed ways of
thinking. As someone with two kids in
the New York City public schools, I can
absolutely confirm that the degree to
which they associate um the mayor with
school lunch policy is extremely real.
And they'll like talk about like, oh, we
used to have these like really nice
waffles or something and then Eric Adams
got rid of him. So like they're really
like keyed in single issue.
>> The real like single issue. They're like
really pay attention to the degree to
which school lunch policy shifts with
administration. Like this is like
they're really
>> they really think what is state
capacity? We we've been using this term
for years on the podcast and we're like
during co we're like you know it took a
it took you know a long time to stand up
testing facilities for people like oh we
lack state capacity. But what is it?
What's the definition? So we actually
distinguish between the word capacity.
>> Okay.
>> Um routines kind of administrative
routines and then capabilities. Okay.
>> So what states are often what
governments are often lacking are those
kind of dynamic capabilities. So
capacity partly is like literally do you
even have fiscal space? Do you have a
budget? Okay. But also, you know, how
are you thinking about that budget in
terms of do you um um well, put it this
way, capacity is, you know, number of
people working in your administration,
the budget that's been allocated, uh
perhaps also the training, you know,
that the civil service actually has, but
capabilities are what you actually then
do with it. Are you agile? Are you
flexible? Are you able to pivot during
COVID and actually start working in this
more again interministerial way? Do you
know how to work with others, right? you
know, do you set up good partnerships or
are they problematic partnerships? Um,
and and also you were talking before
about what you're learning here, which
is fantastic, about how mayors can learn
from each other, right? Have you
invested in your ability to learn,
>> uh, to adapt? And so, I think that
ladder, you know, this this concept of
dynamic capabilities is is a much more
complex area to be investing in. And the
only reason you would do it is if you
actually have a theory about government
that is more than what traditional
economists think about government which
is at best well at worst get out of the
way at best fix the market failure. So
as soon as you say actually it's about
shaping and co-creating a different type
of economy and society that works for
people and planet then the question is
what does that mean for the capabilities
that you need? If you're just fixing
then you just need a lot of bandages and
that's in fact what we get. We get very
reactive kind of filling the gap kind of
policies
>> that pendulum constantly swinging back.
>> Exactly. But I mean capacity of course
is essential without you know a budget
and fiscal space you can do nothing.
That third category that I mentioned
quickly administrative routines that's
you know are you also you know do you
have a stable environment where you can
learn by doing? Because if you're
constantly changing what you're doing
it's going to be hard to have a learning
by doing dynamic. those kind of
administrative routines I even see this
in my university where as soon as you
get a lot of turnover even those kind of
basic routines aren't there but
capabilities so these three areas
capacity routines and capabilities you
know are equally important but the
capabilities are really what I find are
are lacking and it goes back as I was
mentioning before to the underlying
economic dogma that has underpinned uh
the way that we think about policy uh
government at different levels that by
design not by coincidence is reactive
Have consultants become a substitute for
state capacity slash routine
slashadministrative ability?
>> Like I always wonder how we got to the
point where consultants are so big
anyway because it feels like every time
you hire a consultant it's almost an
admission of failure on your part to be
able to do something right and
nevertheless it's a widely accepted
practice across governments.
>> So my last book actually was called the
big con. [laughter] So con for
consulting and and the subtitle was um
how we've weakened businesses,
infantilized our governments and warped
our economies basically due to this
consultation.
I wouldn't blame the consultants. I mean
I actually blame governments right like
why are you opening the door so wide to
consultants and it's fine to have
advisers and some consultants. The
problem is when they are actually doing
the core tasks that government should
do. Again test and trace during COVID
was a core task. Um and so I think it
really stems from I'd say the 80s when
we you know the kind of Reagan Thatcher
years if you want where it always goes
back to Reagan.
>> Yeah. But actually in the UK for example
it even increased more during the Labor
government. So it's not it's not you
know one party but it did begin I'd say
in the 80s with this kind of downsizing
of of governments which then ironically
cost them more because as soon as you
start downsizing without really
strategically thinking what you need and
what you don't need of course you should
trim the fat. there's no reason to have
a, you know, a bloated uh government
structure. But when it's done for
ideological reasons and not strategic uh
reasons, then you know, ironically, then
you end up not having those capabilities
that you need as soon as you have a
flood uh or or, you know, Brexit or
COVID. And so I think then what happens
with the consultants is, you know, it's
not their fault that they're invited in.
I do think it's very problematic what
they end up doing once they're in. So
there's huge conflicts of interest.
Well, the biggest conflict of interest
being that they have no incentive really
to make government better later because
they wouldn't have no contracts. It'd be
like having a therapist your whole life.
That therapist is probably not very
good,
>> which [laughter] which is which is how
the therapy model work.
>> Well, do you remember this came up in
the episode we did about construction in
New York and this idea that like one of
the reasons it's so expensive and takes
so long for like public funded projects
is because consultants have no incentive
to actually get the project done.
>> Yes. But also they're often working on
both sides of the street, right? So
they'll be for example consulting for I
don't know a stateowned enterprise like
ESCOM in South Africa as well as the
Treasury which should be regulating
ESCOM or in Australia there was a famous
case with PWC where they were consulting
for a medical device uh company as well
as the regulators of the medical device
companies like come on so that should
just be illegal right and again you know
getting the right kind of regulation
that makes sure that we don't have these
kind of scams. Uh so what we also argued
was you know the first thing is start
investing back inside uh government so
you you know don't need so much
consulting but also when you do bring in
the consultants make sure the contracts
actually embed learning uh within them
and that you are also bringing in the
right people you know if you have an
oncology strategy of course you should
get the top doctors and consultants and
cancer to advise. So the other huge
problem is that these consultants when
they're coming in, they often actually
don't know very much and they end up
really bothering the poor public
servants that they end up emailing, oh
would you mind telling me what you think
about or sending me your, you know, plan
that we can study. It's like why are you
even working with government if you
don't have within the consulting
companies that deep expertise which, you
know, and I'm I'm not saying this just
because I'm an academic, but I don't
think academics are used enough. You
know, if you have a research center
that's been thinking about climate
change for the last 40 years, use them.
Don't ask McKenzie as Australia did to
design your climate strategy, which
ended up by the way being terrible. So
there is a bit of why is it that
governments a don't invest in their own
capacity and capabilities and b when
they do go out there and look for the
advisers and consultants are kind of
getting the ones that simply kind of
provide a a how do you call it a rubber
stamp, right? That makes them feel more
secure. They haven't even done the
homework to make sure they are getting
the top people in the world to help
advise them on doing you know tasks.
>> Just to take the other side of the coin.
So recently in New York City it was you
know there was um I don't know I think
scandal is too strong of a word but
there were a lot of headlines about how
much the city had paid consultants for
working on redesigning uh the trash
collection system in the city. And on
the one hand it's like trash collection
core city function. Why' you have to
bring in a consultant? On the other
hand, like re reimagining the trash
collection system is like that's a
one-time thing. So maintaining it,
implementing it, servicing it. Okay,
that's like a permanent government
function. But the actual like but the
actual like okay we have to do a
redesign that is is that necessarily
something that like we need to have in
house in government the capacity because
do you want to permanently have that
muscle because that's a oneshot thing.
Doesn't that like to me that makes sense
as a time to bring
>> people also argue for something like
that there's a value to having an
external viewpoint right
>> that makes sense like there's a like the
the redesign that's like a one-time job
like to me I was like all right that
that doesn't seem crazy to bring in a
third party to like help figure out what
that plan is
>> exactly so that's that's the myth right
[clears throat] that somehow we're
talking about either government does
everything Yeah, right or even
nationalize everything or it does
nothing and it privatizes and brings in
the consultants. So the truth is
obviously somewhere in the middle. So of
course you're absolutely right.
Government doesn't have to have all
those skills. It definitely needs the
skills to know who to work with outside
of government. Um but it also needs to
even understand that kind of outside
landscape to even think about what might
we need how might we start developing a
strategy that reimagine say the trash
collection process. So you know that's
why I talk about missions. So when you
know NASA wanted to go to the moon and
back in a short amount of time, they
didn't say we're going to do it all by
ourselves. And they also didn't say
we're just going to do it with the
aerospace sector, right? They said we're
going to have to work with so many
different private sector people. They
ended up working with something like
400,000 people in the private sector. Um
they said we have a lot of problems, but
we don't know the solutions, but we're
going to set very clearly a direction
for working with the private sector in a
problem oriented way. So the first thing
they did was change procurement.
procurement, you know, government
purchasing is often like 30% of a
government's budget. It's a very
important part of their budget, whether
it's Barbados, a small island state, or
the US, a very large uh government.
Procurement is there. How are we using
it? So, they realized they had the wrong
type of procurement. It was just again
minimizing costs. It was cost plus
procurement. They changed it to
outcomesoriented procurement. And they
started to ask themselves, what are the
outcomes that we need? We need to figure
out how are the astronauts going to go
to the bathroom, right? which by the way
was just a problem again with Arteimus.
The toilet always always a problem up in
space. What are they going to eat? What
are they going to wear? How will we
communicate with them? And it was the
solutions to those problems that
happened within mainly not only private
sector institutions with NASA's also
kind of leading investment but
especially leading kind of thought
process of what the problems were. Okay.
that ended up getting us camera phones,
foil blankets, home installation,
software, so many different innovations
across many different sectors,
aerospace, nutrition, materials,
electronics.
>> That itself is what we're talking about,
right? So whether it's going to the
moon, whether it's trash collection,
whether it's school meals, whether it's,
you know, getting prepared for the next
pandemic, which unfortunately the
science tells us will happen. How are we
even thinking within government in a
problem oriented way, a
solutionsoriented way? And this by the
way is why the city lab uh conference is
so wonderful and Bloomberg's uh
government innovation team is so uh you
know how do you say uh uh important for
so many cities is because they then
share their experiences of solving
problems and then they ask and we're
trying to help them do this with this
public sector capability index. What did
we learn along the way that we were
missing? Where were the bottlenecks?
What can we do better? But especially in
terms of that flexibility, adaptability,
uh willingness to experiment, right?
Remember what Kennedy said. We're doing
it because it's hard, not because it's
easy. Yet all the words in policy papers
are about making things easier,
facilitating. I'm Italian, fat or in
Spain, fascia. [laughter] Right? So if
you're facilitating someone, it's not
going to be a good contract. If you're
d-risking someone, it's not going to be
a good contract. If you're simply
enabling, facilitating, fixing, it's
going to be a very bad public private
relationship. Um, just going back to
consultants for a second and I think
[clears throat] this is actually
relevant to the discussion of having
cooperation among like different parts
of the government on big projects, but
how much of the consultancy fetish just
has to do with um diffusing
responsibility? So, I always think back
to the the old um saying about the
purchasing manager thing, you'll never
get fired for buying IBM, right? Like
how much of it is just like, well, you
know, I did my best. I hired McKenzie.
What more can I do? If it goes wrong,
it's Mackenzie's fault.
>> Accountability sync.
>> Absolutely. So that's a really important
point because you know one problem is
when government doesn't have those
capabilities for the reasons we we said
before. Another is even when they have
it, why are they not using it? Australia
again is an interesting example because
they had really interesting capability
within government with their innovation
agency CSRO and yet they gave this
massive contract to McKenzie to do their
climate strategy. Um and it's absolutely
about diffusing that responsibility but
also because of the culture we have
again within government where if they do
make mistakes unlike in the
entrepreneurial ecosystems and you know
VC and so on we don't accept that um but
it's also in the private sector right so
we also talk in the book about the
consultification of management basically
and there as well you know if you're
going to be doing a merger or downsizing
or a massive share buyback scheme isn't
it great if you have you know McKenzie
told us to do it um so also just not
taking on I mean it's kind of cowardly
right like you're not kind of owning
your decisions u I do think it's
different in government I think that you
know changing that culture having more
gov labs like they have in Chile
laborator I don't know everything sounds
better in Spanish right [laughter] you
can say Spanish sounds like an
>> I always say that in Italian every time
we have
it's public sector reform it's just cuts
but it sounds nice
[laughter]
>> it's literally just cuts and So that
idea that what we need is kind of a
laboratory within government but also
between governments I think is really
important. By the way, the head of
procurement in NASA, Ernest Brackett in
the 60s with the Apollo program, not
only did he help change the procurement
policy of NASA, but he also said, "We
got to watch out. There's too many
consultants in these corridors." And his
exact quote was, "If this continues, we
will get captured by brochuremanship,"
which is kind of endearing because they
didn't have powerpoints at the time,
right? So now the the idea that you're
ruling by PowerPoint and that's
basically all they know how to do. um at
the time it was kind of shiny brochures
[laughter]
>> and but but he didn't say we don't want
to work with the private sector right he
said we won't know how to work with the
private sector we won't know how to
write the terms of reference if our own
brains are you know becoming weak so
investing within in order to work also
outside with others so it's not not
working with others it's working smartly
with them
>> so this gets to the sort of one of the
big questions of the day obviously and
that is AI right and so You mentioned
okay school lunches you said a mission
it doesn't mean like the private sector
isn't going to play a role in providing
food or whatever but first you establish
what the mission is then you talk about
the moon it doesn't mean that the
private sector isn't going to play a
role private sector played a significant
role through various technologies or
procurement but there was an overall
mission how are you thinking about AI
should governments first decide like
what is our mission for this what what
missions could it theoretically enable
Like does this feel different than other
endeavors? We obviously know a lot of
public sector money is going to wind its
way up in AI and already has and a lot
of innov. But how are you does this fit?
Is this different? Talk to us about how
you're thinking about this particular
moment of extreme sort of technological
ambition,
>> right? I mean there's so much to say. So
first um the investments that went into
what we call today artificial
intelligence including you know LLM
models, language models uh speech
recognition dates you know decades and
like so many other areas that was led by
government. So if you look at even DARPA
which as you know was the lead um
investor in the internet
>> um it came from problems mainly in the
military-industrial complex that then
required uh ultimately what we're
calling artificial intelligence today.
But again in the entrepreneurial state I
talked about how everything in our
smartphones that make them smart and not
stupid internet GPS touchscreen Siri and
so on were a government finance. What's
very scary today what's what makes today
different with AI is that that's not
really necessarily going to be true much
longer. Why? Because these massive
economic rents and I call them rents not
profits. though excess profits in excess
of what these companies actually did
because we privatized all the rewards
from this massive social [laughter] and
collectively created value in this area.
Um they have so much money right
trillions not billions trillions the
salaries they are paying to the top
researchers in universities both public
and private universities um and to
people who used to work in the NASA the
DARPA the kos in Chile they are going
now to work in these companies and that
hemorrhaging of talent of top research
expertise I don't think people are
talking about this enough it it
literally is the biggest change
>> right because otherwise just you know
the fact that We've had you know big
technological changes general purpose
technologies completely affecting you
know how we produce how we distribute
and you know from the rise of
electrification so on
>> that thing like at one point I mean I
don't think it actually panned out that
great for them but didn't Uber hire the
entire Carnegie Melon robotics team
I think they did I think when when they
were doing self-driving car technology
they just wrote a check for the entire
faculty of the CMU
>> robot otics team and it just
>> but not enough people are talking about
this. So it's very hard to govern a
process for good you know ethically and
so on if you don't understand it.
>> So if this talent is in fact leaving
these publicly financed institutions
even private universities most of the
research as you know has been funded by
NSF and so on. um once they leave
[laughter] and the the the knowledge is
so concentrated in these few AI
companies I don't think we've thought
about that enough but sorry just the
other thing is I mean just coming
[clears throat] back to your question
which I don't think I answered properly
yes of course government should be
thinking because of its at least a
democratically elected government right
this is different for dictatorships what
we would expect from them but we would
expect governments to make sure that any
big change
>> large kind of opportunities around
technological change are done in ways
that are again good for people in
planet, right? But that requires not
only that capacity that as I mentioned
is is is being decimated but also um a
certain type of regulation which is
making sure we even understand the
process of for example how algorithms
are currently being designed and whether
we have a situation like Shashana Zubuff
in her great book surveillance
capitalism she says you think you're
searching Google for free they're
searching you for free you know that
could have been avoided right through
the design of the algorithms and given
that the algorithms initially at least
were publicly financed There is this
issue of how do we in a predistributive
way instead of kind of expost with
redistribution or regulation or market
fixing think about innovation
collaborations that have some of these
really important ethical concerns
thought about upfront and an example of
this would be during COVID where you
know the vaccines were not the mission.
The mission was to allow these vaccines
to be produced and available globally
given it was a global health pandemic.
we were all better off if the world was,
you know, vaccinated. Um, and yet only
one of the vaccines, the one that was a
collaboration between Oxford University
and Astroenica had that kind of
conditionality about what good looks
like at the start in terms of how they
collaborated. So it was a publicly
financed researchers. Oxford is a state
school uh that put that as a condition
with their relationship with Astroenica
that they would share the uh uh
knowledge that they would join the
patent pool, keep cost and prices low.
So more of that.
>> Every time I hear, you know, Tracy, like
someone talk about studying AI in
college and like their professors, I'm
like, that's great, but why are those
professors not in the private sector
making a hundred time? I mean, many of
them are and but I'm always like amazed
that given how much money on the table.
>> Yeah. What are you doing at a
university? You're probably making 10
times.
>> Where did that money come from? This is
the issue, right? So this money that's
being used to pay these very large
salaries that you're talking about,
it's, you know, it's it's very important
to recognize that that didn't come about
because of, you know, early on this
amazing kind of entrepreneurship and all
the knowledge was in these companies.
They gathered that knowledge. Now
they're using it. Of course they're
pushing the frontier. Of course they're
doing research. But that idea of also
making sure that um companies are not
earning in excess, right? So why did the
public purse not benefit in those early
days? Why are they evading so much tax?
I mean, literally in so many countries
paying almost no tax. Um, you know, also
labor exploitation in the case of
Amazon. You know, you don't hear it from
me. You hear it from all sorts of
different investigations even during
COVID, by the way, that they wouldn't
even put the ambulances apparently
outside the warehouse. I don't know.
I've read that. I'm not sure if it's
true, but anyway, the point is that
they're, you know, what does a good
company look like and how does that then
affect the returns that they're earning
and what is a just return versus these
excess returns that now are being used
to,
>> you know, higher in,
>> you know, you mentioned the black box of
the algorithms, which I think is a
really interesting point and um we did
an episode with uh the CTO of Goldman
Sachs recently and we asked him like,
you know, Goldman Sachs is a highly
regulated bank. When you have bank
supervisors who go in and want to
understand your AI system,
>> what are they actually understanding? Do
they like understand the underlying code
that's driving the algorithm? And the
answer was, well, no, not really. You
can't expect them to understand all that
stuff. It's more about having the right
controls in place that prevent the algo
from running a muck. And so my question
is with AI where we have a lot of
experts, highly paid experts and
engineers in the private sector
developing all this new stuff versus a
shrinking body of government officials.
Like what should our expectation be
about how much they understand this
technology,
>> right? Well, it actually comes back also
to that previous point. Do you need all
that expertise inside or also how do you
regulate this in such a way that also
stimulates more innovation because you
don't want to put a cap on the
innovation just by overregulating it.
This is where by the way I disagree with
the abundance theorem which makes it
sound like you know there's all these
opportunities out there and it was
regulation and too much planning and too
many conditions that uh kind of hurt
that which I think actually corporate
governance and shareholder value
maximization has really actually stifled
the opportunities that we have today. So
they don't have to of course understand
the algorithms but they do need to do
exactly as you said like we do with
climate right where there's climate
disclosures we need to know what it is
that we want to be disclosed in fact we
have a project that we just did um that
we just finished with um do you know Tim
O'Reilly
>> yeah so it was Tim and myself uh with a
a grant from the Amidar Foundation um a
project we called algorithmic rents
>> um and how to reduce these rents and how
we're designing algorithms als also
through disclosures. So we thought about
what would be the equivalent of AI
related disclosures uh that could do
exactly as you said be almost the
equivalent of what banks now have to do
but also companies have to do around
kind of ESG kind of metrics.
>> Interesting. And so I mean the project
is still um you know underway and what
we want is actually to find kind of a
coalition of AI companies that would be
willing to think about this with us but
that assumes right that there's also
enough of the science as there has been
with climate change which said this is
an urgent problem and unless we fix it
now we're going to reach a tipping point
where there's no coming back. That's
really when things started to change
around the climate disclosures. We
haven't for some reason reached that yet
even though there's such a link also by
the way by the way between AI and
climate like in terms of these data
centers guzzling you know like for every
uh you know chat GPT search you do
apparently it's it's like using a a
bottle of water like the small plastic
bottles of water like that's literally
how much we're using and yet
>> you know we're not making that kind of
systemic understanding of you know AI
problems and how they are connected to
climate and water problems and so on and
that requires is again government not
just having an indicator like GDP to
think about but a dashboard right when
you're driving your car if you had one
number you know how much gas you have or
how fast you're going you would crash it
so what does a dashboard look like uh
you know for government that would allow
it to make sure it's on track to making
sure that also with the evolution of
technology it's thinking about these
kind of more systemic features and not
just thinking about it as innovation
policy
>> just from a pure sort of history of
technology standpoint does AI feel
different Um I think it definitely fits
with the kind of characteristics of a
general purpose technology in the sense
that it really does kind of change
everything. However, there's also a lot
of um kind of myths around that kind of
a bubble in terms of how we're thinking
not only in terms of the financial
market bubble around it but you know
just like with electricity it took about
30 years for it to actually really
affect uh how governments were
operating. Similarly with the internet,
you'll remember when Robert Solo was
saying, you know, there's computers
everywhere except in the productivity
statistics. I think we're still very
early in the phase with AI in terms of
it having a really meaningful uh impact
on um improving
>> again coming back to the point about
problems, right? This ultimately should
be helping us solve problems. Which
problems is AI really helping us to
solve in a systemic way that can scale
that there's learning between
governments? We're definitely using AI.
Is it actually helping us, you know,
solve some of the biggest problems of
our time? Again, health problems, uh,
climate problems. Surely, there's some
of that. But until we manage this
process, until we govern it both
ethically, but also in a way that is
with government instead of kind of, you
know, sidetracking government in order
to extract these mega rents, then we're
going to have a huge problem.
>> Why do you think that hasn't happened
yet or governments haven't stepped in
faster? Because I do think AI is kind of
unusual in the sense that like you know
you have people like Sam Alman who will
say very publicly in interviews like
yeah this creates a lot of negative
externalities and society is going to
have to figure out how to deal with this
and governments are going to have to
figure out how to actually best deploy
this technology. Open AI published a big
industrial policy document which again I
think is kind of unusual to previous
technological developments and yet
governments seem kind of slow. I don't
want to generalize too much but many
governments seem kind of slow to get in
and really start shaping what they want
to do with AI.
>> Yeah. I mean I think again it seems like
I'm saying the same thing but I really
it's it's because I believe in it. um
you you know this technology on its own
will not solve anything. If it's
accompanied by a strong for example
health system that with AI thinking
about health problems then I can see
that being absolutely revolutionary. Um
and in fact I once heard a really
interesting discussion between Nandan
Nilleani you know it's an incredible um
entrepreneur of computer systems of he
was one of the co-founders of Infosys in
India and um Eric Schmidt um at one of
these um dialogues we have in Belio this
beautiful villa in Lake Ko run by the
Rockefeller uh foundation and we had
kind of Eric Schmidt on the one hand
saying you know in the future all we're
going to really need is an app a health
app and that's going to be fine and
nanilani who really is one of the
biggest innovators around computing was
like what [laughter]
>> like let me tell you in India without a
proper health system no matter how many
apps you have we will continue to have
misery and so it's not one or the other
but what you need is more people like
Nandan who think about what is the
relationship between you know the the
the power of AI and the structure of a
health system um and who's thinking
about that and if we do have at the same
time not just austerity but this you
know kind of dumbing down of what we
think government is for. So even the
health systems we have are not kind of
you know fit for purpose. Then I don't
see any sort of future of AI kind of
helping us with with health problems.
And by the way just look at water. I
mean like 55% of the global food system
right now is at risk because of how
we're treating the global hydraological
cycle. You know biodiversity loss also
in the Amazon is affecting droughts and
and floods in other parts of the world.
That's a huge problem. To what degree
are we really using AI to you know fix
that problem? Yeah,
>> not much. So, it's also about where
we're putting kind of the emphasis and
for that I think we do need these
moonshots governmentled working with the
private sector and again using the power
of AI well regulated to solve very
concrete problems. Yeah, Joe, I was
thinking about um this specifically
related to healthcare recently because
I've seen a bunch of startups that are
saying they're going to simplify the
billing process for hospitals and then
you also know that there are a bunch of
insurance companies that are also using
AI and it's like well if we're just
going to have computers debating with
computers
>> Yeah, exactly. And like if the system
itself doesn't change, nothing's going
to improve,
>> right? No, I I've totally thought about
the same thing where it just like feels
like we're going to have this arms race
where it's like my bot will argue with
your bot and then the only entities that
make any money are
>> the bots.
>> The bot makers, the bot makers.
>> Do you know that Ada Kolo, who was the
mayor of Barcelona,
>> another city here in Spain that you know
well, um she when she was mayor, she
came from a housing movement. So she was
really really concerned with housing
issues uh but also you know public
transport, public schools and so on. And
her thing was why is it that when the
citizens of Barcelona you know like
click on uh Uber or city mapper this
data that's created from that right
because every time we click on something
data is created.
>> She said why aren't we in the city using
that data to improve our decisions and
understanding of our public transport
and public housing challenges. And so
she ended up hiring computer hackers
into the city government. It made it a
really cool place to work. Um and I
think that again kind of insourcing back
in those kind of you know cool hackers
that currently are working in these
companies but to come and work with the
city administration that says we want
you to come in fail but help you know
like don't worry about failing sorry not
fail but you know take risks to help us
though kind of really uh target our our
big you know challenges around housing
transport um and so on inequality in
terms of access. So obviously we're
talking about the public sector, we're
talking about the government's role in
facilitating or guiding various
technologies, but there's also just like
politics, right? Winning elections and
the fact that, you know, as you
mentioned, failures become a scandal and
they're on the paper and maybe like
politicians lose their jobs, then
someone comes in. When you just in your
own personal work, when you like think
about this stuff,
>> like how much do you have to calculate
the reality that one big job of
politicians is to win re-election and
that an election and that a loss of
election has the potential to just take
the government in 90 or 180 degree turn
from whatever the previous
administration at any level in any
country does. And how much do you like
think about that reality when you're
thinking about
>> strengthening government? So the first
time I started to work on missions
wasn't on missionoriented policy. It was
on missionoriented organizations, right?
To to better understand the DARPA kind
of organization, right? Uh Corfo in
Chile is is is similar. Sitra uh in
Finland, Mine Lab in Denmark, Venova in
Sweden. These are innovation agencies
that are in fact making these big bets
that are missionoriented. But my
question was how are they organized? You
know, are they also unstable due to the
electoral cycle? Yeah. And they had
thought about this. I mean, it's it's
not a coincidence that DARPA, for
example, people come in for 5 years. So,
it's not the four-year electoral cycle.
They're actually told, you know, come in
and do take risks. That's how you'll be
uh evaluated. You know, not by just if
you're succeeding all the time, that
means you're not taking those risks, but
also the impact that your successes
have.
>> Um, and so that kind of cultural shift,
but also the fact that people are coming
in kind of on seconment. You know,
they're not there to be a civil service,
civil servant their whole life. So, we
we started studying. Well, I mean, for
some for some areas, I think that's
fine, especially around innovation,
right? You want to coming back to the
idea that we want to bring in and crowd
in the top talent into government, you
know, having like a 5-year period that
you're going to help as a civil servant,
paid by the government, not as a
consultant, you know, working with, not
at the civil service. I I do think
there's lots of kind of room for that.
But um so that idea that because we
value the private sector there has been
for example think of Harvard Business
School where they have this case study
methodology of businesses. We've never
really done that with government
entities because we don't value uh you
know basically government as a value
creator. It's just seen as a
redistributor, a fixer, a facilitator,
an enabler of the private sector. And
that's of course where then we expect
creativity and value to be created which
is not right. Um and so and so think so
one of the things that we do in the
institute which is actually a department
so we train up civil servants around the
world also you know through our own MPA
masters and public administration but
also through um applied learning
programs was to start developing these
cases you know what do we know about the
BBC you know how is it different from
other public broadcasters how do they
measure what they call public value what
is public value yeah so even having you
know comparison learning between say a
public bank the BBC a government digital
agency on what it means to crowd in or
crowd out the private sector, what it
means to shape markets, not fix them.
What does it mean to have a culture of
experimentation versus this huge risk
averseness that that as we said before
is a cause for the consultification. So
I think a lot about that um but it's not
you know there's so much instability
obviously also in the private sector. So
there is a bit of a myth that it's all
unstable in the public sector because of
electoral turnover. We can shape these
bureaucracies to be creative
bureaucracies, resilient bureaucracies.
They don't have to be vertical and and
so inertial. But the other point I think
that's sort of stemming I think in your
question tell me if this is not related
is literally winning the election. What
are we learning globally? You know why
is it that Biden whose economic policies
were actually quite successful in the
red states at least starting to be quite
successful. Why in those states did he
not win? And I think there's something
going on in a lot of countries,
definitely also in Italy and the UK, um,
where people who have been, let's just
use the concept, left behind on terms of
the economic benefits, at least in the
past, even when new economic policies
work, that's not enough if people don't
feel valued, if they don't have their
dignity back, if they continue to feel
condescended upon. So, one of the really
cool things I've been working on with
city governments, but even councils, so
my neighborhood in London is called
Camden. It's about 250,000 people. I
worked with the council on
missionoriented procurement for adult
social care across 10 housing estates
what you call projects in the US and we
brought the carers and the carries to
the table to design that policy. So
working with people really valuing their
lived experience to help us design
policies that are meaningful and will
improve their lives. I think there's
it's just so important firstly to get
those policies to be designed right but
also to give people again dignity and
selfworth and I've seen it also you know
because we have so much inequality uh in
the UK unfortunately we have food banks
which is barbaric if you think about it
in the 21st century food banks like you
know we should not have that people
should have food you know on the table
uh you know enough and healthy food we
don't have that so transforming food
banks into food cooperatives green food
cooperatives where the people benefiting
from the the what was a food bank are
now also in the place of governing of
having real deliberation of thinking
together. I can tell you the people I
saw working in the food banks who were
also receiving the food. The facial
expression, the dignity, just even how
people are standing is completely
different from a system where you know
you
>> here's someone's expired like
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> pumpkin from last Thanksgiving.
>> No, but even if it's good food, if you
know having again, you know, bringing
back dignity and value,
>> it's so important I think to fight
populism. [laughter]
I'm going to ask what is potentially an
unfair and loaded question, but I think
it might be quite illustrative of
everything that we've been discussing.
When you look across the world, are
there particular countries or cities
that you think are doing industrial
policy right in the sense that they're
taking maybe a holistic approach with a
defined strategy/mission?
>> Um, well, so I tend to also look at like
very specific things that a government
did instead of just saying the whole
government's perfect, right? So for
example in Brazil something they've done
that I think has been very positive is
that they've put what I call missions at
the center of government. So the
ecological transition is at the center
and that then required the department of
finance for example to rethink its own
tools uh for example a public bank right
so BNDS which is one of the largest
public banks in the world it can either
just again give money out to say the
aggro business industry or save the
steel industry when it's going bust or
because there's an ecological transition
it can think about uh how these sectors
themselves need to change in order also
to access the loans that the bank is
giving Germany by the way did that when
they had the energy vende policy their
public bank the KFW uh the way they
provided support to the steel sector
which in the US and the UK and so many
countries steel is under pressure this
the loans to the steel sector were
conditional that the sector lower the
material content of production which
they did in their own way had government
told them how to do it you kill
innovation but strong directional
loans and they ended up now having the
greenest steel in the world it might not
be competitive yet and that's a scale
issue that has also to do with
regulation but you know repurpose reuse
recycle technology uh in steel only
happened because the public bank that
was mission aligned so I'm very
interested in procurement public loans
stateown enterprises digital public
infrastructure examples where they're
not just things that are there but
they're used to really transform and and
help development um Sweden is also
really interesting because they had a a
high level challenge right missions are
somewhere between a challenge like the
space race and a sector like aerospace,
right? So the moon mission required lots
of different sectors but it was very
concrete [clears throat] whereas the
challenge of say climate change or all
the sustainable development goals those
are kind of very broad. So transforming
them into missions and their challenge
was um I think they said they wanted a
fossil-free welfare state and that's why
then they they said well what are the
missions we were working with them on
this and so we were kind of stimulating
some of this thought through Venova
their innovation agency what are the
missions that will help us achieve that
and that's where then the healthy tasty
sustainable school meals policy came
from we worked with them on that also in
Brazil we just actually put out a report
about this with the world food program
but what was interesting again was that
then that required government to work in
a different way again interministerily
uh you know catalyzing bottom-up
experimentation local manufacturing but
through also the redesign of the tools
themselves um the UK which I don't think
is a very good example right now I mean
there's lots of instability there's also
been you know 14 years of austerity some
things that were really interesting and
this is why I look more at the
organizational kind of examples was
government digital services uh GDS which
basically began and by government back
in the early 2000s saying why does
everyone have to go to say Google to
download a a white paper why don't we
have our own kind of digital platform
they did what most governments do
outsourced it to a company called Ciro
which is not a very innovative company
at all gets lots of government contracts
uh they failed miserably and then people
from the I player team and the BBC uh
said we'll do it [laughter] so they went
over to the cabinet office set up
government digital services uh came up
with this incredible digital platform
called govuk K, which won an
international design award. But what was
interesting to me from that example was
that the first thing they did was look
out the window and said with arrows
pointing out the window, those are not
clients and customers. Let's stop
talking about people as clients and
customers. They are users with human
rights and how they will access their
driver's license, their passport, their
voter registration has to enhance their
like their souls and not make them want
to die. if you see the Ken Loach movies
where you know people literally want to
die when they're accessing their welfare
payments because of just the
complications around it and so making
you know having kind of like a
userfriendly government digital platform
that changes the experience of a citizen
with those rights that they have um
through the technology just requires a
very different kind of mind shift and it
became the coolest place to work. So if
you were top, you know, software
engineer or even, you know, um, whatever
these these hackers that Adakala wanted
to hire, that's where they wanted to
work to the point that lots of private
companies were having a hard time
finding the top talent because they all
wanted to work in in GDS. So again,
those are the examples I think we need
to look for, not like which is the
government that's doing everything
perfectly.
>> All right, Professor Matukado, thank you
so much. Great to finally catch up with
you. It took us all like randomly being
in the same location in Madrid. But
thank you so much. Thank you so much for
coming on OddLots.
>> Thank you so much for having me.
>> Tracy, I'm glad we finally caught up
with Professor
>> Matuk. This was the place to do it.
>> This is definitely the place to do it. I
think it really did. Her framing makes a
lot of sense. This idea that like
outsourcing is not per se bad. that
obviously any major mission is going to
have to have significant private sector
involvement and innovation even if it's
somehow publicly led but that there's no
like chance of going anywhere if there's
you know if the public sector doesn't
have the internal muscle of like who to
talk to or who to talk to at the right
time
>> or how to judge performance
>> how to judge performance seems
absolutely a key question
>> and that kind of gets back to the
mission idea which I do I really I like
the idea of focusing on what you're
trying to achieve rather than just how
you're actually going about achieving
it. Like that makes a lot of sense to me
if you're dealing with a vast
bureaucracy with lots of different
silos. And also I think like getting
back to that expertise point does mean
that you do develop that muscle
internally within the organization
rather than just like okay we're going
to hire McKenzie um to figure out how
we're going to do something. Instead,
you say, "Well, we want to do X. Let's
all get together and figure out how to
do it."
>> You know, AI seems like a weird thing uh
as a technology because all right, on
the one hand, you could say like, "All
right, we want to massively improve our
healthare system. We want to massly
improve health care outcomes." And I
think you could like very easily say,
well, AI is going to be really big part
of that, right? And maybe make things a
lot more efficient, maybe give
information access to a lot of people,
identify experts, etc. there's all
>> develop new medicines that
>> yeah totally and so great so maybe the
mission has something to do with health
and AI plays ano important component of
it I guess what's strange though is that
AI itself creates its own potential
pitfalls I mean the industry as you
mentioned is obsessed with the pitfalls
of its own making right and so there is
almost no way that AI can just be a tool
in service of some other mission because
almost everyone who knows something
about AI I sees potential for extreme
exacerbation of inequality, potentially
AI robots that will be misaligned and
want to kill us all when they have
sufficient capabilities. Just little
things.
>> Yeah. Right. And so like on the one hand
like yes as a technology it might fit
into some of these other big missions
but on the other hand it sort of feels
like it has there has to be some like AI
specific goal of like where do we want
this technology to go or how do we how
do we curb it or whatever it is that
seems very distinct.
>> No, totally. And I do think the unusual
part of this moment in time and a lot of
people will argue that maybe it's
marketing or whatever, but you do see
the big tech CEOs like basically going
on TV and and saying like we as a whole
society need to figure out what we want
to do here.
>> And I don't think it is marketing or
just marketing because a there's already
this very big tech backlash, right? So
like if we're like it's not working, you
know, if the idea is, oh, we want to
plump our valuations and so we do that
by saying the TAM is all human labor
>> and human life.
>> Yeah. Then you say, well, you're really
upsetting a lot of people by saying
this. It's not that's not obviously
good. And B, you know, it's uh we've
written about or talked about, you know,
some of these big labs like they were
founded from day one with the premise
that this is not normal technology,
which is why it's like housed in a
nonprofit or something like this. So, I
tend to think that when the CEOs of
these companies talk about this stuff,
they kind of mean what they say, they
too are they too are concerned. I mean,
I also worry without some sort of
government intervention or government
strategy here, we are going to get to
that situation where we deploy AI and
because we're not fixing the underlying
system, we're just sort of nibbling at
the ed edges and making it worse per
that idea of like, okay, the insurance
bot is going to talk to the hospital
bot. And both of them are going to say
that they're streamlining the billing
process for medical services, but
because we're all doing the same thing
without actually fixing how medical
bills work and who pays for what in the
US, like
>> it's just going to be bots fighting
bots. No one's going to benefit from
that.
>> No. And most likely there will be sort
of, you know, just ongoing increased
complexity.
>> It's bots all the way down.
>> Bots all the way down.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Alaway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Mariana Matsucado. She's at Matsucadom.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman Dashel Bennett atbot.
Kellbrooks at Kalebrooks and Kevin
Lozano at Kevin Lloyd Lozano.
>> And for more OddLots content, you should
check out our daily newsletter at
bloomberg.com/odlotss.
>> And you can chat about all of these
topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
[music]
>> [music]